# Shifts of the Demand or Supply Curve

  -  **Demand** shift to the **right**
    
      -  **Increase** in equilibrium price
    
      -  **Increase** in equilibrium quantity

  -  **Demand** shift to the **left**
    
      -  **Decrease** in equilibrium price
    
      -  **Decrease** in equilibrium quantity

  -  **Supply** shift to the **right**
    
      -  **Decrease** in equilibrium **price**
    
      -  **Increase** in equilibrium **quantity**

  -  **Supply** shift to the **left**
    
      -  **Increase** in equilibrium **price**
    
      -  **Decrease** in equilibrium **quantity**

  -  Graph

![FIGURE 10 How an Increase in Demand Affects the Equilibrium An event
that raises quantity demanded at any given price shifts the demand curve
to the right. The equilibrium price and the equilibrium quantity both
rise. Here an abnormally hot summer causes buyers to demand more ice
cream. The demand curve shifts from D to D, , which causes the equilib-
rium price to rise from $2.00 to $2.50 and the equilibrium quantity to
rise from 7 to 10 cones. Price of Ice-cream 52.50 2.. resulting in a
higher 3. \_ anda higher quantity sold. . Hot weather increases tip
demard fu ice cream.. Supply New equilibrium Initial equilibrium
Quantity of Ice-cream Cones ](./media/image41.png)

![Price of 1. An increase in the price of Ice-cream sugar reduces the
supply of ice cream New $2.50 equilibrium 2.00 resulting in a higher
price of ice Initial equilibrium 3. ...andalower quantity' sold. FIGURE
11 How a Decrease in Supply Affects the Equilibrium An event that
reduces quantity sup- plied at any given price shifts the supply curve
to the left. The equilib- rium price rises, and the equilibrium quantity
falls. Here an increase in the price of sugar (an input) causes sellers
to supply less ice cream. The supply curve shifts from Sl to S2, which
causes the equilibrium price of ice cream to rise from $2.00 to $2.60
and the equilibrium quantity to fall from 7 to 4 cones. Demand Quantity
of Ice-cream Cones ](./media/image42.png)

  -  Examples

  ![Machine generated alternative text: Demand for Steak (increase 111
  Income Steaks are normal goods 个 & Equilibrium Quantity Equilibrium
  Price ](./media/image43.png)
  
  ![(Example 111 • Supply of Pizza (decrease in cost of cheese, which is
  an input) Equilibrium Price \_ J/\_ & Equilibrium Quantity
  ](./media/image44.png)

 

# Shifts of Both the Demand and Supply Curves

  -  Demand & supply shift to the **right**
    
      -  **Increase** in equilibrium **quantity**
    
      -  Equilibrium **price unsure**

  -  Demand & supply shift to the **left**
    
      -  Decrease in equilibrium **quantity**
    
      -  Equilibrium **price unsure**

  -  **Supply** shift to the **left** and **demand** shift to the
     **right**
    
      -  **Increase** in equilibrium **price**
    
      -  Equilibrium **quantity unsure**

  -  **Supply** shift to the **right** and **demand** shift to the
     **left**
    
      -  **Decrease** in equilibrium **price**
    
      -  Equilibrium **quantity unsure**

  -  Graph

![FIGURE 12 A Shift in Both Supply and QEQI Here we observe a
simultaneous increase in demand and decrease in supply. Two out- comes
are possible. In panel (a), the equilibrium price rises from PI to P2
and the equilib- rium quantity rises from QI to In panel (b), the
equilibrium price again rises from PI to P2 but the equilibrium quantity
falls from QI to g. Demand Price of Ice-Cream Large Cone increase in
demand (a) Price Rises, Quantity Rises New S2 equilibrium decrease Da su
Initial equilibrium Quantity of Ice-Cream Cones (b) Price Rises,
Quantity Falls Price of Ice-Cream Cone Small Increase In demand Initial
equilibrium New equilibrium S2 Large decrease ppb' In Su Quantity of
Ice-Cream Cones ](./media/image45.png)

  -  Summary
    
      -  Change in **same** direction: equilibrium **quantity** for
         sure
    
      -  Change in **opposite** direction: equilibrium **price** for
         sure

  -  Examples

  ![Example V Demand and Supply of Gas Guzzlin S s (Price of gasoline
  falls and wages o auto workers jncreqses ) cmler,mb E uilibrium Price
  & Equilibrium Quantity SUV VehiCk ](./media/image46.png)
  
  ![Example VI Demand and Supply of Coca-cola (Price of Pepsi Cola falls
  and cost of aluminum increases) Q x Equilibrium Quantity
  ](./media/image47.png)

 

# Changes in equilibrium

  ![No Change In Demand An Increase In Demand A Decrease In Demand No
  Change in Supply P same Q same p up Q up P down Q down An Increase in
  Supply P down Q up P ambiguous Q up P down Q ambiguous A Decrease in
  Supply Q down Q ambiguous P ambiguous Q down ](./media/image48.png)