# What is Elasticity of Demand

  -  Price elasticity of demand (PED or E<sub>d</sub>)
    
      -  Measure used to show the **responsiveness**, or
         **elasticity**, of the quantity demanded of a good or service
         to a change in price.
    
      -  Devised by Alfred Marshall, using the **ceteris paribus** (all
         other things being equal) assumption, price elasticity shows
         by **how much quantity changes** as a result of a **change in
         price**. (Disregard the negative)
    
      -  Formula

  ![i)ud ru\!Gu0 001 aoud ut aiurqo aamiaond puetuap JO papuetuap Kmuenb
  = aogd u\! ajueqo ainu ](./media/image53.png)

  -  How to remember
    
      -  **Queen** is greater than the **Princess**

#  

# The Variety of Demand Curves 

![The price elasticity of demand determines whether the demand curve is
steep or flat. Note that all percentage changes are calculated using the
midpoint method 2.... 2.. 2.. 1 FIGURE The Price Elasticity of Demand
(a) Perfectly Inelastic Demand: Elasticity Equals 0 (b) Inelastic
Demand: Elasticity Is Less Than 1 Price $5 4 1. An Increase n price . 0
Price $5 4 Increase •n price 0 Demand IOO Price $5 4 Increase In pnce .
Quantity 90 IOO Demand Quantity leaves the quantity demanded unchanged.
.. leads to an 11% decrease in quantity demanded. (c) Unit Elastic
Demand: Elasticity Equals 1 Price $5 4 Increase In price 0 IOO Demand
Quantity .. leads to a 22% decrease in quantity demanded. 2.. (d)
Elastic Demand: Elasticity Is Greater Than 1 50 IOO Demand Quantity
Price $4 0 (e) Perfectly Elastic Demand: Elasticity Equals Infinity . At
any price above $4, quantity manded is zero. Demand . At exactly $4,
consumers will buy any quantity. Quantity .. leads to a 67% decrease in
quantity demanded. 3. At a price below $4, quantity demanded is
infinite. ](./media/image54.png)

#  

# Elastic Demand

  -  When **e \> 1**, demand is elastic, or the **percent change in
     quantity** is **greater** than the **percent change in price.**

  -  It means that the product is relatively **price-sensitive**

  -  ie. fast-food restaurants, fruits, haircuts

  -  Demand curve is relatively **flat**.

 

# Inelastic Demand

  -  When **e < 1**, demand is inelastic, or the **percent change in
     quantity** is **less** than the **percent change in price.**

  -  It means that the product is **not very sensitive** to a **change
     in price**

  -  ie. gasoline, insulin

  -  Demand curve is relatively **steep**.

 

# Price Elasticity of Demand and Total Revenue

  -  The total amount paid by buyers, and received as revenue by
     sellers, equals the area of the box under the demand curve.

  ![Price $4 PX Q = $400 (revenue) IOO Demand Quantity
  ](./media/image55.png)

  -  When demand is **inelastic (e < 1)**, price and total revenue
     move in the **same direction**:
    
      -  If the price increases, total revenue also increases.

  -  When demand is **elastic (e \> 1**), price and total revenue move
     in **opposite directions**:
    
      -  If the price increase, total revenue decreases.

  -  If demand is unit elastic (e = 1), total revenue remains constant
     when the price changes.

  ![Price 2 .. the extra revenue from selling at a higher price .. (a)
  The Case of Inelastic Demand (b) The Case of Elastic Demand 3... 1.
  When the demand curve is inelastic the extra revenue from 2....
  selling at a higher price . Price $5 $4 0 1. When the demand urve is
  elastic $5 $4 90 IOO Demand Quantity 70 IOO Demand Quantity . is
  greater than the lost revenue 3... from selling fewer units. . is less
  than the lost revenue from selling fewer units. ](./media/image56.png)

  -  Examples

  ![Example I If the price of an economics textbook is $100 you sell 90
  apies, but if you lower the price to $80, \#'011 sell filhänd the
  elasticity of demand. Is it elastic Find 7178ÄäÄlTÄGiG8Ä)icI it
  increase or decrease? By how much? o,zQ0 40 —100 -go 100 5 10 = 80 =
  89000 — 100 = $qooo Inelastic, wben you price , fie revenue decreses.
  ilem iS 'OiSZ fie price) revenue increase, ](./media/image57.png)
  
  ![Example 11 If the pric.& of an Academic Decathlon t-shirt is ELL,
  you sell shirts but if you you sell the elasticity of demand. Is it
  elasti or inelastic? Find the total revenue. Did it iiiöi•éåse or
  decrease? By how much? Q,-Qc Elastic 200\* 100 too 10-15 10 100 100 10
  If elas}iC) when you raise He price, TP- ebshc when lower encej TR b
  200 = $200 decrease ](./media/image58.png)

 

# Midpioint Method to Find Elasticity

  -  Definition

  ![One way to avoid this problem is to use the midpoint method for
  calculating elas- ticities. The standard procedure for computing a
  percentage change is to divide the change by the initial level. By
  contrast, the midpoint method computes a per- centage change by
  dividing the change by the midpoint (or average) of the initial and
  final levels. For instance, $5 is the midpoint between $4 and $6.
  Therefore, ac- cording to the midpoint method, a change from $4 to $6
  is considered a 40 percent rise because (6 4) / 5 X 100 40. Similarly,
  a change from $6 to $4 is considered a 40 percent fall. Because the
  midpoint method gives the same answer regardless of the direc- tion of
  change, it is often used when calculating the price elasticity of
  demand between two points. In our example, the midpoint between point
  A and point B is: Midpoint: Price = $5 Quantity = 100 According to the
  midpoint method, when going from point A to point B, the price rises
  by 40 percent and the quantity falls by 40 percent. Similarly, when
  going from point B to point A, the price falls by 40 percent and the
  quantity rises by 40 percent. In both directions, the price elasticity
  of demand equals 1. The following formula expresses the midpoint
  method for calculating the price elasticity of demand between two
  points, denoted (Q, PI) and (Q, P2): Price elasticity of demand — - +
  PI)/2\] ](./media/image59.png)

  -  Comparison

  ![If the price of 2 slices of Pepperoni Pizza is $4, you sell R). If
  you raise the prÄ835'SÄwill sell 6.Qt Find the elasticity of demand
  using 12.QLh\_the point and midpoint methods. Is it elastic or
  inelastic? Find the total revenue. Did revenue increase or decrease?
  By how much? 10 $30 dueasesb $10 ](./media/image60.png)

 

# Factors That Determine Price Elasticity

  -  Whether close substitutes are available
    
      -  Tends to be **high** if consumers are willing to **replace**
         with substitutes.
    
      -  Tends to be **low** if there are **no close substitutes**

  -  Whether the good is **necessity** or a **luxury**
    
      -  Life-saving **medication** will be **inelastic** but things
         you can **live without** tend to be **elastic**

  -  Time
    
      -  PED tends to **increase over time**
    
      -  ie. demand for gas is more elastic as behavior changes

  -  Share of income spend on the good
    
      -  Elasticity of demand tends to be **low** when **prices are
         lower**
    
      -  Conversely, PED is **higher** when **prices are higher**

 

# Price Elasticity Along the Demand Curve

  -  Price and total revenue

| Inelastic | Price↑ | Total Revenue↑ |
| --------- | ------ | -------------- |
| Inelastic | Price↓ | Total Revenue↓ |
| elastic   | Price↑ | Total Revenue↓ |
| elastic   | Price↓ | Total Revenue↑ |

  -  Graph

![6-5 FIGURE Price $10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 o Total revenue $25 24 21 16 9
The Price Elasticity of Demand Elastic Unit-elastic Changes Along the
Demand Curve Demand Schedule and Total Revenue for a Linear Demand Curve
1 Price $0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Quantity demanded 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2
Total revenue $0 9 16 21 24 25 24 21 16 9 2 2 3 3 4 4 5 6 6 7 7 8 8
Inelastic 9 10 Quantity 9 10 Quantity The upper panel shows a demand
curve corre- sponding to the demand schedule in the table. The lower
panel shows how total revenue changes along that demand curve: at each
price and quantity combination, the height of the bar rep- resents the
total revenue generated. You can see that at a low price, raising the
price increases total revenue. So demand is inelastic at low prices. At
a high price, however, a rise in price reduces total revenue. So demand
is elastic at high prices. Demand is elastic: a higher price reduces
total revenue. Demand is inelastic: a higher phce increases total
revenue. ](./media/image61.png)

  -  Example

  ![(Example V Assuming that your goal is to maximize revenue, what
  portion of the demand curve will you be c, unit-elastic, or inelAic?
  operating on: el Explain. elosHC menue ](./media/image62.png)

![Machine generated alternative text: The slope of a linear demand curve
is constant, but its elasticity is not. The demand schedule FIGURE 4 in
the table was used to calculate the price elasticity of demand by the
midpoint method. At points with a low price and high quantity, the
demand curve is inelastic. At points with a high Elasticity of a Linear
Demand 3.7 1.8 1.0 0.6 0.3 0.1 price and low quantity, the demand curve
is elastic. Price $7 6 4 3 2 0 Elasticity is smaller than 1. 2 4
Elasticity is larger than 1. 6 8 10 12 14 Quantity Curve Elasticity 13.0
Price $7 6 5 4 3 2 1 Quantity 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 Total Revenue (Price x
Quantity) $0 12 20 24 24 20 12 Percentage Change in Price 15 18 22 29 40
67 200 Percentage Change in Quantity 200 67 40 29 22 18 15 Description
Elastic Elastic Elastic Unit elastic Inelastic Inelastic Inelastic
](./media/image63.png)