# Consumer Surplus

  -  Meaning
    
      -  the difference between the buyer's **willingness to pay**
         versus what he **actually pays**

  -  Graph
    
      -  On a supply and demand graph, the area of consumers surplus
         (CS) is **below** the **demand curve** but **above** the
         **equilibrium price**

![Machine generated alternative text: figure 49.3 Consumer Surplus The
demand curve for computers is smooth be- cause there are many potential
buyers. At a price of $1 ,500, 1 million computers are de- manded. The
consumer surplus at this price is equal to the shaded area: the area
below the demand curve but above the price. This is the total net gain
to consumers generated from buying and consuming computers when the
price is $1 ,500. Price of computer Consumer surplus $1,500 Price 1
million Quantity of computers ](./media/image77.png)

  -  Example 1

![table 49.1 Consumer Surplus When the Price of a Used Textbook Is $30
Potential buyer Aleisha Brad Claudia Darren Edwina All buyers
Willingness to pay $59 45 35 25 10 Price paid $30 30 30 Individual
consumer surplus = Willingness to pay — Price paid $29 15 5 Total
consumer surplus $49 ](./media/image78.png)

  ![Price of book $59 45 35 30 25 10 Aleisha's consumer surplus: $59 -
  $30 = $29 Aleisha Brad's consumer surplus: $45 - = $15 Brad Claudia's
  consumer surplus: $35 - = $5 Claudia Price Darren 2 3 4 Edwina 5
  Quantity of books ](./media/image79.png)

  -  Example 2

  ![If Aurelia is willing to pay $5 for a concert ticket and Rose is
  willing to pay $10 for a concert ticket and Kaylee is willing to pay
  $15 for a concert ticket but the market price of the ticket is $8,
  what is the total consumer surplus after all tickets are purchased?
  10-g-n 15-g=$7 Concer+ Tickeb with a q CONumer ](./media/image80.png)

#  

# Producer Surplus

  -  Meaning
    
      -  the difference between the price a sellers **pays** for and
         what he was actually **willing to sell for**

  -  Graph
    
      -  On a supply and demand graph, the producer surplus is
         **above** the **supply curve** but **below** the **equilibrium
         price**.

![figure 49.8 Producer Surplus Here is the supply curve for wheat. At a
price of $5 per bushel, farmers supply 1 million bushels. The producer
surplus at this price is equal to the shaded area: the area above the
supply curve but below the price. This is the total gain to
producers—fanners in this case—from supplying their product when the
price is $5. Price of wheat (per bushel) $5 Producer surplus 1 million
Price Quantity of wheat (bushels) ](./media/image81.png)

  -  Example 1

  ![table 49.2 Producer Surplus When the Price of a Used Textbook Is $30
  Potcntial scllcr Andrew Carlos Donna Engelbert All sellers Cost $5 15
  25 35 45 Price rcccivcd $30 30 30 Individual producer surplus = Price
  received — Cost $25 15 5 Total producer surplus $45
  ](./media/image82.png)
  
  ![Price of book $45 35 30 25 15 5 o S Engelbert Donna Carlos's
  producer surplus Andrew's producer surplus 5 Price Betty Andrew 1 2 3
  Carlos 4 Bettys producer surplus Quantity of books
  ](./media/image83.png)

  -  Example 2

  ![If Aram is willing to sell a candy bar for $1 and Nathan is willing
  to sell a candy bar for $1.50 and Gerardo is willing to sell a candy
  bar for $2.00, how many candy bars will be sold and what is the total
  producer surplus if the price of the candy bar is $2.00? Price : a.oo
  $1.50 a—ISO Geordo via-as ](./media/image84.png)

 

# Total Surplus

  -  Meaning
    
      -  the **sum** of consumer and producer **surplus**

  -  Graph
    
      -  the area **between** the supply and demand **curves** up to
         the **equilibrium quantity**

  ![Consumer surplus Equilibrium . price Producer surplus Equilitrium
  quantity D Supply Demand Quantity ](./media/image85.png)

 

# Effects of Taxes on Surplus

  -  How does a tax affect hotel owners?
    
      -  An excise tax on hotel owners will shift the **supply** curve
         to the **left**
    
      -  The equilibrium **price** will be **higher** and the
         equilibrium **quantity** will be **lower**

  ![CSI psacs) CSO (g-q) 100 4<100 ](./media/image86.png)

  -  How does a tax effect hotel guests
    
      -  An excise tax on hotel guests will shift the **demand** curve
         to the **left**
    
      -  The equilibrium **price** will be **higher** and the
         equilibrium **quantity** will be **lower**
    
      -  The tax incidence in both cases are
  **identical**

  ![C:\\CE5A5F25\\EA5686BB-78FF-4844-9ADF-D3586C9ED368\_files\\image087.png](./media/image87.png)

  -  How the imposition of a tax will decrease consumer and producer
     surplus

  ![Old CS•. AtBŕE öta 6•. CtD+ř Rev ](./media/image88.png)

![A Tax Reduces Consumer and Producer Surplus Before the tax, the
equilibrium price and quantity are Pgand respectively. After an excise
tax of T per unit is imposed, the price to consumers rises to Pcand
consumer surplus falls by the sum of the dark blue rectangle, labeled A,
and the light blue triangle, labeled B. The tax also causes the price to
producers to fall to Pp;producer surplus falls by the sum of the dark
red rectangle, labeled C, and the light red triangle, lab4ed E The
government receives revenue from the tax, QTX T, which is given by the
sum of the areas A and C Areas B and Frepresent the losses to consumer
and pro- ducer surplus that are not collected by the govern- mentas
revenue; they are the deadweight loss to S)Ciety of the tax. Excise tax
= T Price Fall in consumer surplus due to tax Fall in producer surplus
due to tax Quantity ](./media/image89.png)

  -  Deadweight loss

![figure 50.12 The Deadweight Loss of a Tax A tax leads to a deadweight
loss because it cre- ates inefficienw: some mutually beneficial trans-
actions never take place because of the tax, namely the transactions OF
— QT. The yellow area here represents the value of the deadweight
loss: it is the total surplus that would have been gained from the 0€—
QTtransactions. If the tax had not discouraged transactions—had the
number of transactions remained at Of—no deadweight loss muld have been
incurred. Price Excise tax = T Deadweight loss Quantity
](./media/image90.png)

 

# International Trade

  -  Autarky
    
      -  the quality of being **self-sufficient** with **no imports or
         exports**, a **closed** economy

  -  Free trade and Tariffs
    
      -  Free trade **increases total surplus**
    
      -  **Tariffs** serve to **reduce** allocative **efficiency**

 

# Importing Countries

  -  The **World Price** (P<sub>w</sub>) will be **below** the autarky
     price and **total surplus** will **increase**

  -  Domestic **consumers gain**, domestic **producers lose**, but the
     **net gain** is **positive**

![Machine generated alternative text: Before Trade Consumer Surplus
Producer Surpl us Total Surplus Price of Textiles Price before trade
Price after trade After Trade c Change The area D shows the increase in
total surplus and represents the gains from trade. c Domestic quantity
supplied mports Domestic quantity demanded Domestic supply World price
Domestic demand Quantity of Textiles ](./media/image91.png)

  -  **Buyers** are **better off** (consumer surplus rises from A to A
     + B + D)

  -  **Sellers** are **worse off** (producer surplus falls from B + C
     to C)

  -  **Total surplus rises** by an amount equal to area D

  -  Trade **raises the economic well-being** of the country as a
     whole.

 

# Exporting Countries

  -  The **World Price** (P<sub>w</sub>) will be **above** the autarky
     price and **total surplus** will **increase**

  -  Domestic **consumers lose**, domestic **producers gain**, but the
     **net gain** is **positive**

![After Trade Consumer Surplus Producer Surplus Total Surplus Price of
Textiles Price after trade Price before trade Before Trade c Change The
area D shows the increase in total surplus and represents the gains from
trade. c Exports D xports Domestic quantity demanded Domestic quantity
supplied Domestic supply World price Domestic demand Quantity of
Textiles ](./media/image92.png)

  -  **Sellers** are **better off** (producer surplus rises from C to B
     + C + D)

  -  **Buyers** are **worse off** (consumer surplus falls from A + B to
     A)

  -  **Total surplus rises** by an amount equal to area D

  -  Trade **raises the economic well-being** of the country as a
     whole.

 

# The Effects of a Tariff

  -  Tariff
    
      -  a government **tax** on **imports or exports**

  -  Example 1

  ![Graph what would happen if an importing countyy imposes a tariff in
  order to protect the corn industry from low world prices. Who gains?
  Who loses? loss? Is this efficient? 'WiFfs% •rwe MAI CS+PS or surplus
  S J ce01 ](./media/image93.png)

  -  Example 2

![FIGURE 4 The Effects of a Tariff Consumer Surplus Producer Surplus
Government Revenue Total Surplus A tariff reduces the quantity of
imports and moves a market closer to the equilibrium that would exist
without trade. Total surplus falls by an amount equal to area D + F.
These two triangles represent the deadweight loss from the tariff.
Before Tariff None After Tariff Change The area D + F shows the fall in
total surplus and represents the deadweight loss of the tariff. Price of
Textiles Price with tariff Price without tariff Domestic supply
Equilibrium without trade c Imports with tariff Imports without tariff
Tariff Domestic demand World price Quantity of Textiles
](./media/image94.png)